---
title: "Inhibition of system Xc- transporter protects the CNS in autoimmune inflammatory demyelination."
collection: posters
type: "Poster"
permalink: /posters/nov2014-2
venue: "Society for Neuroscience Meeting"
date: November 16, 2014
location: "Washington, D.C., USA"
---

This poster was presented by DeSilva lab trainee Ryan Doyle, who I mentored during my graduate training. His research was an extension of my project in which he used pharmacological inhibition of the system xc- transporter in SJL/J mice induced with a relapsing-remitting model of autoimmune demyelination to demonstrate abrogation of clinical scores and reduced histopathology. <a href="https://www.abstractsonline.com/Plan/ViewAbstract.aspx?sKey=c75dcad4-87dc-47a9-babc-06e91753c0f7&cKey=c35873e1-6fb0-4145-9dbe-526240968a3d&mKey=54c85d94-6d69-4b09-afaa-502c0e680ca7" target="_blank">[Online Program]</a>


Program#/Poster#: 223.22/H11


Authors: 

R. Doyle, **K. S. Evonuk**, B. J. Baker, C. M. Sestero, B. Johnston, P. De Sarno, A. Tang, I. Gembitzky, C. Raman, T. M. DeSilva
 
Univ. of Alabama At Birmingham, Birmingham, AL


Abstract:

Mechanisms underlying demyelination in autoimmune neuroinflammatory diseases are not well understood. Several lines of evidence suggest that glutamate dysregulation in the CNS is an important consequence of immune cell infiltration in neuroinflammatory demyelinating diseases. Excitotoxicity as a mechanism in autoimmune encephalomyelitis is supported by animal studies where blocking the AMPA-type glutamate receptor prevents myelin degradation. Evidence in this regard is further substantiated by studies in MS patients where elevated levels of glutamate are found in white matter lesions and cerebral spinal fluid. However, the causal link between inflammation and glutamate dysregulation is not well understood. Here, we examine the role of the system Xc- transporter as a glutamate release mechanism during inflammatory conditions. We report that myelin-specific CD4+ T cells stimulated nitric oxide production from microglia that was blocked by neutralizing antibodies to the cytokines IFN-gamma and TNF-alpha. Microglia stimulated with IFN-gamma and TNF-alpha showed increased expression of the system Xc- transporter, which enhanced glutamate release, causing excitotoxic death to mature oligodendrocytes, the cells that comprise the myelin sheath. We next examined the role of the system Xc- transporter in the CNS after immune cell infiltration. We observed increased expression of system Xc- in reactive glia in spinal cords of C57Bl/6 mice subjected to EAE compared to control. Pharmacological inhibitors of the system Xc- transporter administered after the first relapse in a SJL animal model of relapsing-remitting EAE abrogated clinical disease. This observation was consistent with a reduction in reactive gliosis and myelin loss. Taken together these studies support an important role for the system Xc- transporter in promoting myelin destruction after immune cell infiltration in autoimmune inflammatory demyelination.