---
title: "Hippocampal neuroinflammation and cognitive decline as a consequence of acute myocardial ischemia-reperfusion."
collection: posters
type: "Poster"
permalink: /posters/nov2014-3
venue: "Society for Neuroscience Meeting"
date: November 18, 2014
location: "Washington, D.C., USA"
---

This poster was presented by DeSilva lab graduate trainee Bryce Johnston with data demonstrating that ischemia-reperfusion in mice results in activation of microglia and astrocytes in the hippocampus and impaired hippocampal-dependent learning and memory. <a href="https://www.abstractsonline.com/Plan/ViewAbstract.aspx?sKey=8d86b6b5-65d9-4dc4-9b97-53b5a5db4027&cKey=1669db9f-8734-4caa-9925-7c0e22f51656&mKey=54c85d94-6d69-4b09-afaa-502c0e680ca7" target="_blank">[Online Program]</a>


Program#/Poster#: 545.13/PP2


Authors: 

B. Johnston<sup>1</sup>, **K. S. Evonuk**<sup>1</sup>, M. E. Young<sup>2</sup>, T. M. DeSilva<sup>1</sup>

<sup>1</sup>Dept. of Physical Med. and Rehabil., Univ. of Alabama At Birmingham, Birmingham, AL; <sup>2</sup>Div. of Cardiovasc. Diseases, Dept. of Med., Univ. of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL


Abstract:

An emerging literature has demonstrated the need to further understand the impact of cardiovascular disease (CVD) on cognitive decline. Human studies have documented lesions in brain regions critical to learning and memory, and a correlation between impaired cognitive function and adverse cardiac events. To better understand the mechanisms of CVD-related cognitive decline, and propose therapeutic strategies to ameliorate cognitive decline in this rapidly expanding patient population, it is essential to validate animal models that recapitulate the neuropathology in these phenotypes. We utilized two murine models of ischemia-reperfusion (I/R), an open- and closed-chest model. For the open-chest model, the left anterior descending (LAD) coronary artery of 20 week old C57BL/6 male mice were ligated for 30 minutes followed by reperfusion. An occluding device was implanted in the closed-chest model without immediate ligation. One week later, the LAD was occluded for 30 minutes followed by reperfusion. Seventy-two hours post-surgery the hippocampus was assessed for reactive glia. Using stereological methods, every 10th serial section of the CA1, CA3, and dentate gyrus subfields of the hippocampus from bregma -1.06 mm to bregma -3.64 mm were counted to determine GFAP and Iba-1 positive cell estimates. Activated astrocytes and microglia in all subfields of the hippocampus in both I/R models were increased relative to sham controls. To investigate how vascular permeability may change in response to I/R, mice received tail-vein injections of FITC-dextran and TRIC-albumin 72 hours post-I/R. An increase in fluorescent intensity for both markers was observed in the hippocampus of mice subjected to I/R. Consistent with an increase in activated glia and vascular permeability within the hippocampus a deficit in hippocampal-dependent learning was observed. Contextual fear-conditioning demonstrated a decrease in freezing behavior in mice 2 months post I/R relative to sham. These data suggest that following a cardiac-ischemic event, rapid inflammatory responses in the hippocampus contribute to subsequent impairment in hippocampal-dependent learning and memory.