---
title: "System xc- transporter modulates CNS infiltration of immune cells in autoimmune inflammatory disease."
collection: posters
type: "Poster"
permalink: /posters/nov2014
venue: "Society for Neuroscience Meeting"
date: November 16, 2014
location: "Washington, D.C., USA"
---

The data I presented in this poster demonstrated reduction of immune cell infiltration into the central nervous system after pharmacological inhibition of the system xc- transporter and resistance to development of clinical scores in mice with a mutation causing inactivation of system xc- in a mouse model of autoimmune demyelination. <a href="https://www.abstractsonline.com/Plan/ViewAbstract.aspx?sKey=c75dcad4-87dc-47a9-babc-06e91753c0f7&cKey=6d43324d-281f-4ea0-879c-9545c828d589&mKey=54c85d94-6d69-4b09-afaa-502c0e680ca7" target="_blank">[Online Program]</a>


Program#/Poster#: 223.11/G12


Authors: 

**K. S. Evonuk**<sup>1</sup>, B. J. Baker<sup>1</sup>, R. E. Doyle<sup>1</sup>, C. M. Sestero<sup>1</sup>, B. P. Johnston<sup>1</sup>, P. De Sarno<sup>1</sup>, A. Tang<sup>1</sup>, I. Gembitsky<sup>1</sup>, S. J. Hewett<sup>2</sup>, H. Sontheimer<sup>1</sup>, C. Raman<sup>1</sup>, T. M. DeSilva<sup>1</sup>
 
<sup>1</sup>Univ. of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL; <sup>2</sup>Syracuse Univ., Syracuse, NY


Abstract:

T cell infiltration into the central nervous system (CNS) is a significant underlying pathogenesis in autoimmune inflammatory demyelinating diseases. Mechanisms that regulate immune cell infiltration into the CNS are not well understood. The neurotransmitter glutamate has been implicated in modulating blood-brain barrier permeability and may contribute to the vulnerability of the CNS to immune cell infiltration during pathological conditions. The system xc- transporter is a source of glutamate release during oxidative stress and is upregulated in leukocytes from human blood samples in patients with multiples sclerosis as compared to control samples. Therefore, we tested the role of system xc- in regulating immune cell infiltration in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) using pharmacological and genetic approaches. Pharmacological blockade of system xc- in the C57Bl/6 animal model of EAE attenuated T cell, macrophage, and neutrophil infiltration into the CNS. These data were consistent with reduction in both clinical disease and myelin loss. Precursor frequency of peripheral MOGp-reactive T cells (CFSE assay) and their ability to enter into cell cycle was not affected by inhibitors of system xc-. These data suggest that low numbers of infiltrating inflammatory cells in the CNS of mice treated with inhibitors of system xc- was not due to compromised activation of MOGp T cells in the periphery. Furthermore, mice harboring an Slc7a11 (xCT) mutation that inactivated system xc- were resistant to EAE corroborating a central role for system xc- in the pathogenesis of EAE. Taken together our data support a novel role for the system xc- transporter in mediating T cell infiltration into the CNS in autoimmune inflammatory diseases.