---
title: "Effects of social and enriched environments on recovery from medial frontal cortex lesion in a rat model."
collection: posters
type: "Poster"
permalink: /posters/nov2010
venue: "Society for Neuroscience Faculty for Undergraduate Neuroscience Poster Session"
date: November 15, 2010
location: "San Diego, CA, USA"
---

I presented this poster featuring the continuation of my undergraduate work on effects of social and enriched environments on traumatic brain injury (see poster presented in April 2010). The research was conducted as part of my undergraduate training under the tutelage of Dr. Jeffrey Smith at the University of Portland.

Authors: 

**Neeck, K.**\*, Smith, J.
<br/>\*Neeck, K. is the maiden name of Kirsten Evonuk.


Abstract:

Traumatic brain injury (TBI) is a major cause of death and disability in the United States, with 1.7 million people becoming afflicted each year. The medial frontal cortex (MFC) contusion is a common type of TBI that causes psychological disorders, memory impairment, and negative anatomical consequences. The present study investigated the effects of an enriched environment (EE) and a social (SO) environment (defined as EE without stimuli) on spatial learning and memory and healthy neuron numbers in the medial dorsal nucleus (MDN) of the thalamus and CA3 region of the hippocampus. Thirty-two adult male Long-Evans rats were given either a MFC contusion using the controlled cortical impact (CCI) model described by Hoffman, Fülöp, and Stein (1994) or sham surgery and were subsequently placed in either EE housing or SO housing. Seven days post-surgery, spatial learning and memory were assessed for 10 days using the Morris water maze (MWM) task, and animals were perfused 25 or 26 days post-surgery for quantification of surviving neurons. Both EE and SO housing were found to be beneficial to recovery from MFC contusion, as animals in EE housing did not differ significantly from animals in SO housing in latency to platform or numbers of quadrants traversed in the MWM task, or in numbers of healthy neurons in the MDN of the thalamus and CA3 region of the hippocampus. These results indicate that the social component of the EE is important in the beneficial effects observed in animals in EE housing and that the toys used as stimuli in EE housing may not have beneficial effects as many or as powerful as they are credited for.